
columnstore

two new features
a. store data by column  --> I/O savings
b. compression --> I/O savings
c. batch mode



typical BI query
-fact join dimenstion, filter and group by a catetorical dimension column, aggregate some measure in fact table
-dwh table usually have many columns, i.e. it is de-normalized
-most query select only a small subset of columns
-not very selective in where clause. i.e. the purpose the aggregation

in reporting and analytical processing, the typical query looks much different. In a data warehouse (DW), most tables have dozens of columns (at least), and most queries select only a few of those columns – forcing SQL Server to process the pages that contain not only the three columns you need, but also all of the other columns, even though they are not needed. A second difference is that typical DW queries are not very restrictive; they process large amounts of data, using a WHERE clause that selects millions of rows or even no WHERE clause at all, and then use aggregates to trim the result set to something a human can peruse




two types
a. clustered
b. non-clustered: in sql 2012, only non-clustered are available

shortcomings
a. outer join can be slow in 2012, because outer join is not an operator supported by batch mode. But in 2014, it is not a problem
b. bad for OLTP, row by row based operatoin
c. the expensive process required to build the index
d. structure does not lend itself to updates
e. restricted dml


row-oriented storage
-ideal for OLTP workloads. if you want instert a record, only 1 page is affected.
-queries that are selective enough only touch one or two pages(assuming properly indexed)



when to use column-store
a. when you often select only a subset of columns, and when the table has many column
b. when your where clause is not very selective, when you are is not aimed at searching for only a few rows

rowgroups and segments
segment elimination
-That is because SQL Server, in the metadata for each individual segment, keeps track of the minimum and maximum of all the values stored in that segment

compression

dictionaries
For a column with colors, the dictionary would, for instance, contain a list of the value pairs (Black, 1); (Red, 2); (Green, 3); (Mauve, 4)
